### Background and Overview
As the pandemic threatens the health and economic security of communities around the globe, the issue of equity—whether gender equity, equity in access, racial equity, equity for linguistic and cultural groups, and age-group equity—has come to the forefront of debates among policymakers, civil society, educators, industry leaders, and other stakeholders. For groups invested in addressing the pandemic through uses of digital contact tracing technologies (DCTT), the threat that DCTT could exacerbate the social inequities should be acknowledged and taken seriously. Likewise, moving privacy and equity to the center of the conversation about DCTT can improve trust in the institutions administering DCTT and contribute to better local adoption.

In this brief discussion, we outline considerations in equity and fairness to encourage those using this playbook to think about how DCTT can be used in a trusted, service-integrated, and nondiscriminatory way and, subsequently, improve adoption. We also highlight emerging legislative trends shaping DCTT initiatives across the US, which are increasingly codifying the equitable and ethical considerations raised in this Playbook.

#### Privacy, Equity and COVID-19 ####

While privacy and equity may not be the first thing people think about when discussing how to combat COVID-19, each is foundational in effectively addressing the challenges caused by the virus. Addressing COVID-19 requires all members of a community to work together and trust in the institutions implementing digital solutions for COVID-19.

The COVID-19 pandemic has drawn greater attention toward numerous societal disparities, including access to technology, health information, and healthcare. Management and tracking of COVID-19 infections can undoubtedly amplify existing inequities, whether this is through manual contact tracing or DCTT that relies on diagnostic testing for results. Moreover, digital management of COVID-19 depends on distribution of associated infrastructure, such as broadband access, ownership and use of smartphones, and even electricity. Public health research has shown that COVID-19 infections have disproportionately impacted different groups of people throughout America. Senior citizens succumb to infections at a higher rate, and senior citizens of color are at an even higher risk of premature death. Among younger persons, infection rates, morbidity, and mortality affect low income essential workers tasked with maintaining our functioning economy at higher rates than others of the same age or socioeconomic status. Without a critical amount of support within a community, the ability to effectively conduct contact tracing goes down.

Additionally, there are communities throughout the United States that are over-policed and over-surveilled. This is important because without institutional trust in the entities administering DCTT, many will see the risk posed by over-policing and over-surveilling as not being worth the benefit of effective contact tracing. This is particularly true in communities with large immigrant populations who may be without documentation or with language barriers. As a fundamental principle for use and design, no contact tracing technology should be developed or deployed if it will exacerbate existing inequalities or create new pathways for the inequitable treatment of persons or communities. In particular, DCTT should not elicit fear of being tracked, deported, disenfranchised, displaced, or stigmatized.

*What steps can be taken to address and mitigate those inequities and leverage opportunities to foster trust among our most socially vulnerable communities?*  In short, a maximin principle of distribution should be embraced to maximize the minimum payoff for participation in DCTT for those most severely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. In providing access to contact tracing technologies to the greatest number of individuals, and making purposeful steps to include those who are most negatively affected by the digital divide, the positive health effects of DCTT won’t remain with those individuals who are already at low risk of contracting COVID. Also, and importantly, no DCTT user should be penalized or stigmatized in any way for any behavioral data collected and/or reported through a DCTT initiative. While these steps are larger than any one stakeholder can take alone, DCTT developers and promoters should band together to move forward on these steps in earnest.

#### Privacy Legislation and COVID-19 ####

The risk that structural inequities and regulatory gaps will undermine public trust and adoption of DCTT has also spurred a new spate of state and federal legislative activity. Currently, the United States does not have a comprehensive federal privacy law, instead relying on a patchwork of state privacy laws. The absence of a comprehensive regulatory framework has left open questions about how public and private sector organizations should protect and use personal data during the COVID-19 pandemic. In an attempt to set ethical guardrails and create more clarity, legislators have introduced numerous bills to regulate contact tracing apps and COVID-19-related data.

At the federal level, there have been multiple calls for a comprehensive federal contact tracing strategy, and three key privacy bills have emerged. The Exposure Notification Privacy Act, [a bipartisan bill](https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/senate-bill/3861), would apply to the operators of contact tracing apps. Many of its provisions align with Terms of Service for the Google-Apple Exposure Notification (GAEN) API. For instance, data could only be collected and processed for the purpose of responding to COVID-19, could only be retained for a certain period of time, and only confirmed diagnoses could be processed to trigger an exposure notification. Two other bills, [one introduced by Senator Wicker](https://www.commerce.senate.gov/services/files/A377AEEB-464E-4D5E-BFB8-11003149B6E0) and [one by Senator Blumenthal](https://dd80b675424c132b90b3-e48385e382d2e5d17821a5e1d8e4c86b.ssl.cf1.rackcdn.com/external/public-health-emergency-privacy-act-5-14-20.pdf), would regulate COVID-19-related data more broadly. However, these bills diverge along partisan lines around key issues, including their scope, preemptive capacity, enforcement mechanisms, and anti-discrimination and research protections. Nevertheless, there is agreement between all three of these bills on the need for contact tracing apps to be fully voluntary.

In the absence of a federal law, states are leading the way when it comes to the regulation of DCTT. California (AB89) and South Carolina (HJR5202), have already passed legislation preventing budget funds from being allocated for contact tracing apps. In South Carolina, any technologies deployed for contact tracing must also be “maintained in a decentralized manner” (e.g., case management tools, or medical monitoring tools). Kansas signed HB2016 into law in June, prohibiting state and local government entities engaged in contact tracing from using smartphone location data to “identify or track...the movement of persons” for contact tracing. Notably, depending on how this is interpreted, this law might nevertheless permit the utilization of Bluetooth signals to measure relative proximity between two individuals. Digital contact tracing bills have also arisen in New Jersey, Minnesota, Utah, and in other states.

States have also been proactive in addressing barriers to trust and equity beyond contact tracing, and in particular in acting to prevent data from being repurposed in ways that may harm individuals and marginalized communities which have frequently been the target of over-policing and surveillance. For example, the New York legislature passed a bill (A10500) with wide [support](https://www.aclu.org/press-releases/civil-rights-groups-health-advocates-and-public-defenders-celebrate-passage) from civil rights and advocacy groups to protect the confidentiality of contact tracing information and prohibit access by law enforcement and immigration authorities. A similar bill has gained traction in California (AB660). Other recent New York bills would ban all persons and state entities from collecting or using facial recognition technology to track COVID-19 (S8311) or impose obligations around transparency, data minimization, purpose limitations, data retention, and data security on government entities that collect, use, or disclose “emergency health data” (e.g., location, proximity, and health-related data), entities that develop or operate COVID-related apps, and downstream third party recipients (S8448). Similar to a bill in California (AB1782), New York’s S8448 would also aim to empower individuals to revoke their consent to the collection, use, and sharing of their personal information.

While the relationship between DCTT, privacy, and equity during the COVID-19 pandemic is a complex one, it is more important than ever to ensure individuals and communities are protected and their personal information is used in an ethical and responsible manner.

[The above section was developed and featured as part of a submission to the [MIT Computational Law Report as part of the Special Release on COVID-19](https://law.mit.edu/pub/digitalcontacttracingaplaybookforresponsibledatause/release/1).]


### Introduction
COVID-19 is an unprecedented public health crisis. As the disease continues to spread through communities across the U.S. and abroad, information about the illness continues to evolve. To slow the spread, public health officials are turning to contact tracing as a means to track cases, identify sources of transmission, and inform people who may have been exposed to take precautions that can prevent further transmission. 

Manual contact tracing is a scientifically established method that can help understand the spread of communicable diseases. For contact tracing to be most effective, people must share sensitive personal information regarding their whereabouts and the people with whom they have been in close proximity. This information allows contact tracing professionals to trace or map their locations and connect with those with whom they have been in close contact. One unique feature of the COVID-19 era is the way digital technology is facilitating these processes.

Digital contact tracing technology (DCTT) has the potential to significantly reduce the spread of COVID-19 and assist with reopening efforts. Technologies such as smartphones, mobile device applications (apps), and the network of data transfer protocols (e.g., APIs) have been pulled together to produce digital contact tracing technologies. Contact tracing apps track an individual’s exposure to COVID-19 and notify the individual if they encounter another app user who has tested positive for the virus, or who has self-reported as positive. These apps typically track users through either geolocation data or Bluetooth proximity data, or both. 

Apps relying on geolocation data use GPS, WiFi, or cell phone towers to track users’ locations, while Bluetooth apps check for other nearby devices using the app and exchange a unique, often rotating, token with the other device.[^1] The app later searches a database of tokens registered to users who have self-reported testing positive for COVID-19 to determine if the user was exposed to the virus.[^2] 

Apps using geolocation data are considered more privacy invasive because they rely on tracking the user’s location to determine proximity to other users. Bluetooth proximity apps only collect proximity data but rely on constant broadcast from a Bluetooth device, and may be less accurate than apps relying on location data.[^3] This is a particular problem for centralized Bluetooth-based apps, which are not able to make use of the Google-Apple Exposure Notification API for decentralized exposure notification apps. 

The design and use of these apps create privacy risks and raise ethical questions. MIT Technology Review [assessed](https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/05/07/1000961/launching-mittr-covid-tracing-tracker/) apps developed by 25 countries, while the Internet Digital Accountability Council [reviewed](https://digitalwatchdog.org/privacy-in-the-age-of-covid-an-idac-investigation-of-covid-19-apps/) 108 apps across 41 countries. Many of these apps failed to minimize their collection efforts and did not provide guarantees for destroying the data after a set period. Some countries’ apps also failed to place limits on the use of collected data and many of the apps reviewed did not provide transparency around their policies or design.[^4] By taking these concerns into account, organizations that develop or use contact tracing apps can protect both health and privacy, and increase trust in contact tracing apps and other digital tools.

While health behavior changes at the population level, such as social distancing, hand washing, and wearing face coverings, are the current best approach to containing the spread of COVID-19, both analog and digital contact tracing are important elements of a comprehensive approach to containing the spread of this viral disease. Nevertheless, DCTT raises significant ethical and privacy concerns that should be addressed through design and policy. 

Public health authorities, application developers, and users of DCTT need better information on how to best preserve privacy and ensure ethical use of contact tracing data, so they can better scale contact tracing initiatives and reduce the spread of COVID-19. 

[Brighthive](https://brighthive.io/) and the [Future of Privacy Forum](https://fpf.org/) teamed up to kick off this privacy playbook to assist the coalitions of professionals invested in development and deployment of trusted DCTT. The playbook provides a series of actionable steps that purposefully address the privacy concerns of DCTT and support the development of ethical and responsible digital contact tracing protocols. 

In particular, this playbook has been developed with the following types of scenarios, or use cases, in mind: 1) easing tension between application providers, public health officials, and government authorities; 2) supporting “opt-in” models for individuals to share health and location data; 3) supporting employers that are turning to internal contact tracing when their workplaces reopen.

This playbook is organized into two categories: Foundational and organizational plays, and technical and operational plays. Foundational and organizational plays create a strong, diverse coalition with a unified goal and set of values, aid in the administration of DCTT initiatives, and ensure that the coalition adheres to its shared values and gains the public’s trust. These plays are geared toward leadership, policy, and partnership roles in an initiative. 

The technical and operational plays support implementing the DCTT initiative in a way that is consistent with other plays, the coalition’s values, and users’ privacy rights. These plays are geared toward technical, project management, and day-to-day operational roles in the initiative. 

While plays are geared toward different roles, Brighthive and FPF advise collaborating across team and function through the lifecycle of the DCTT initiative.

*Take the Next Step*
- Suggest a play to add to this playbook or suggest edits by [sending us a message](https://brighthive.io/make-a-playbook-suggestion/).
- Discuss this playbook and share learnings with others using the playbook in our [Brighthive Responsible Data Sharing Slack Community](https://brighthive.io/slack-community-signup/).
- [Connect with a Brighthive team member](https://brighthive.io/playbook-next-steps/) to learn how Brighthive can help you solve a responsible data sharing challenge.


[^1]: Tokens are a unique identifier tied to a user's phone.  Apps that make use of rotating tokens change the token identified with a user's phone on a regular basis. This helps protect user privacy by essentially dividing a user's data across multiple identities.
[^2]: Andy Greenberg. “How Apple and Google Are Enabling Covid-19 Contact-Tracing.” Wired. April 10, 2020. https://www.wired.com/story/apple-google-bluetooth-contact-tracing-covid-19/.
[^3]: Sam Biddle. “The Inventors of Bluetooth Say There Could Be Problems Using Their Tech for Coronavirus Contact Tracing.” The Intercept. May 5, 2020. https://theintercept.com/2020/05/05/coronavirus-bluetooth-contact-tracing/
[^4]: Patrick Howell O’Neill, Tate Ryan-Mosley, & Bobbie Johnson. “A flood of coronavirus apps are tracking us. Now it’s time to keep track of them.” MIT Technology Review. May 7, 2020. 



### Resources
This playbook was informed by the following resources: insights and recommendations from FPF [workshops](https://fpf.org/2020/03/27/privacy-and-pandemics-a-thoughtful-discussion/), [publications](https://fpf.org/tag/pandemic/) & [testimony](https://fpf.org/2020/04/09/fpf-provides-senate-testimony-on-strategies-to-mitigate-privacy-risks-of-using-data-to-combat-covid-19/); Georgetown Beeck Center [Data Governance Handbook](https://beeckcenter.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/Data-Sharing-Appendix.pdf); Johns Hopkins [Digital Contact Tracing book](https://muse.jhu.edu/book/75831/pdf); [Law.MIT principles](https://law.mit.edu/) and related efforts; [STAT](https://www.statnews.com/2020/06/05/contact-tracing-technology-protect-people-from-discrimination-disease/) news articles and commentary; and other data protection COVID-19 [guidance](https://sites.google.com/fpf.org/covid-19-privacy-resources/#h.p_l4tfppxBBjkU)/resources. 

### Acknowledgements
Brighthive would like to thank Maithri Vangala, Natalie Ortiz, Samantha Levy, Hana Passen, Brian Lim, Autumn Felty, Joanna Tess, Kelly Dolan, Natalie Evans Harris, and Matt Gee for their expertise and contributions to the development of this playbook.

Future of Privacy Forum would like to thank Kelsey Finch, Sara Jordan, RacheleHendricks-Sturrup, Pollyanna Sanderson, Brenda Leong, and Katelyn Ringrose for theirexpertise and contributions to the development of this playbook.

### Footnotes
