---
play_number: 1
title: Build and Align a Diverse Coalition
---

*Job seekers look to numerous resources and supports as they consider their options, but sifting through the volume of available information can be overwhelming. Developing and aligning a coalition will make sure that everyone is singing from the same song sheet. The most effective way to provide positive outcomes for job seekers is to unite organizations in a coalition with common goals that include: developing and promoting job seeker tools and resources; ensuring job seekers have adequate support to help them navigate and interpret the tools; developing accountability measures and metrics; and sharing and using data.*

Job seekers operate in noisy environments – with many options and opinions – and it is difficult to know which resources should be trusted and which are the most effective. 

A coalition involving a wide array of agencies, organizations, and voices will help ensure the inclusion of necessary voices, relevant data, and outreach. By inviting multiple stakeholders, coalitions will be able to facilitate discussions about job seeker needs, how to promote equitable and successful outcomes, and the potential impact on society. The collaboration will be more representative of the experience of the job seeker who must successfully interact with multiple agencies, interfaces, organizations, barriers, and the situations that arise from the combined interactions. These discussions will include job seekers’ and potential intermediaries’ input and needs, to ultimately ensure stakeholder buy-in.

The key to any successful, sustainable collaboration among multiple organizations is a clearly defined and documented shared goal or priority, especially when collaborators must share sensitive data to achieve that goal or priority. Collaborators can identify the crucial data and information that job seekers need by identifying a common user of the data and resources.

### Checklist
1. Determine a common goal or extremely short list of goals to focus on, while leaving the longer list for next steps. Taking on too much at once can muddle and overextend resources.
2. Determine which organizations have relevant data, services, and capacity to shape and contribute to the common goal, especially those who have specific resources to reach and serve communities of color, rural populations, etc. 
3. Start by establishing partnerships with the most targeted group necessary to accomplish the goals of the coalition - you can grow the coalition over time.
4. While the coalition should start small, consult widely - include all relevant stakeholders and partners, especially voices that can speak to the experiences of vulnerable job seekers.
5. Include job seekers, or a representative of job seekers, as a critical part of the coalition.
6. Bring in employers as an important partner throughout the process, including working with them to reduce bias in the job posting and hiring process.
7. Develop cross-sector relationships with a personal touch – reach out and meet with people, develop a shared understanding of the challenge and potential solutions.
8. Evaluate current partnerships to determine whether there are existing resources to deploy in service of the goal. 
9. Identify the needs of job seekers and employers, equity gaps that need to be filled, and economic opportunities that will be addressed.
10. Make equity an explicit part of the conversation, especially around how data and support services can be used to both identify and rectify issues of historic and structural inequity.

### Key Questions
**Public Agencies**
- What other public agencies should be included?
- What kinds of private organizations should be involved?
- How can those agencies and organizations be involved?
- What do those agencies and organizations add? How can they help increase capacity?
- How does each organization help address equity gaps?

**Private Sector**
- What can you provide beyond what exists?
- How can you augment existing efforts? What kind of agencies should be involved?
- What outreach is most effective to form the appropriate relationships between organizations?
- How can you develop sustainable, cross-sector relationships?

**Philanthropy**
1. Are there collaborations already serving the proposed population/geography?
2. If there are existing collaborations, can those be leveraged or brought into the proposed project?
3. Are the partnerships deep and sustainable?

### Resources and Examples

- [National Skills Coalition, State Initiatives and Academies](https://www.nationalskillscoalition.org/state-policy/state-initiatives-academies): Information about and examples of state coalitions for workforce development. 

- [WorkSourceWA](https://www.worksourcewa.com/): WorkSource is a statewide partnership of state, local and nonprofit agencies that provides an array of employment and training services to job seekers and employers in Washington. Customers access services electronically through WorkSourceWA.com or through a network of more than 60 WorkSource centers, affiliates and connection sites.
