---
play_number: 2
title: Design for the Job Seeker
---

*Job seekers need tools that are easy to access, navigate, and understand, and that provide them with the resources, information, and connections they need to find a job, leverage their experience and skills, and access support. The most effective job seeker tools will provide individuals (or intermediaries) with the information they need on a variety of platforms.*

All too often, job seeker tools are difficult to access or navigate, only address a single worker need, or do not provide adequate information for users to make well-informed decisions. In the worst cases, the information provided is biased, inaccurate, inaccessible, or incomprehensible. When designing these tools and resources, take special care to ensure that they are offered through various modalities (particularly in communities where internet access is limited) and are easy to understand. These tools must help job seekers communicate their qualifications and must inform them about other helpful support services and resources.

### Checklist
1. Determine the end user (including intermediaries).
2. Content is critical: develop wording, information, and outputs that are relevant to those users. It may be necessary to develop multiple versions of the same tool for specific audiences.
3. Consider engaging an external user interface designer.
4. Establish a quality assurance process and criteria to assess the information provided to job seekers, in order to determine whether the stated goals of the tool are being accomplished.
5. Plan for evaluation and continuous development, including incorporating stakeholder feedback. 
6. Provide versions in different languages as appropriate.
7. Develop tools to be accessed across a variety of platforms (mobile, desktop, phone, printouts, brochures, etc.).
8. Guide users in translating their qualifications and skills into a record of their experience for potential employers.
9. Evaluate design principles and criteria for equity.

### Key Questions
**Public Agencies**
- What are the specific needs of the vulnerable workers?
- What are the demographics and geography that affect how individuals will interact and use the tools?

**Private Sector**
- What are the best practices for design?
- How can you contribute to the design process and share your findings with the community?

**Philanthropy**
- What lessons about design for different audiences can be shared to make the most effective tools?
- How can your investment facilitate an open applications marketplace that enables multiple applications to run using shared data?
- How can your impact metrics encourage understanding of and accountability to job seeker needs?

### Resources and Examples
- **BrightHive tip on designing for the user:** to engage in a thoughtful and iterative user-testing process throughout development, test the wording and design with a representative sample of the intended diverse audience. Start early in the process by testing wireframes and mockups (static or interactive visuals of the tool before it is built), then a prototype (a representation of the tool’s functionality that should cost a very small fraction of the cost of producing your planned tool). This allows critical changes to be made early at low expense and hone in on user experience.
- Data for the American Dream, [Communicating with Vulnerable Workers](https://d4ad.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Communication-Research-Brief.pdf): This report synthesizes existing research about how to communicate effectively with low-wage, unemployed, and underemployed workers. 
- Data for the American Dream, [Ten Strategies for Reaching Workers](https://d4ad.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/D4AD-Needs-of-Workers.pdf): The top 10 strategies for effective communication and impact with vulnerable workers.
- Data for the American Dream, [Addressing the Needs of Vulnerable Workers and Workforce Development Systems](https://d4ad.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/D4AD-Needs-of-Workers.pdf): A quick-reference with workers’ needs, traditional supports, existing barriers, and solutions.
- [Digital.gov Guides and Resources](https://digital.gov/resources/): A compendium of useful practices in accessibility, agile, UX, plain language, open data, product management, and more.
