---
play_number: 3
title: Make It Relevant
---
*Job seekers require current information tailored to their specific needs. They need to know the precise skills to acquire to get better jobs in their local labor market. All of this depends on quality labor market information curated in a way that makes it relevant, accessible, and understandable. Job seekers need to know which opportunities are priorities and which pathways will pay off meaningfully both in the short and long term.*

The demand for workers is unique to a specific geographic area. Tools need to leverage the most current labor market information to ensure that the information provided by the tool both serves the worker and helps the local economy. Stakeholders must therefore set up data sharing initiatives in a way that compiles up-to-date and accurate information about the training programs and jobs that are available, maps them to the relevant skills, and enables this data to be recompiled on a regular basis to generate data resources that reflect rapid and local changes in the economy. The utilization of cross-sector experts is critical in making sure this work is done correctly and reflects on-the-ground realities, as well as immediate needs or opportunities in a region. The need for this data already existed, but the economic impacts of COVID-19 has introduced the need for new design considerations that ensure this data is calculated often, accurate within localities, and sustainable so that this data continues to be generated without creating a heavy lift on data providers.

### Checklist
1. Determine specific regional and local needs using the most current, reliable labor market information.
2. Include newly emerging jobs as well as jobs in both long-standing sectors (for example, not focusing tools solely on COVID-19 related jobs presently).
3. Provide information on the specific skills needed to obtain and be successful in these jobs.
4. Utilize emerging technologies to customize data and information for individual job seekers’ needs, goals, capacities, interests, and skills. 
5. Ensure all information provided to job seekers is accurate, timely, locally relevant, and ideally, engaging.
6. Keep up to date on research and initiatives at the cutting edge of workforce development, focusing on trends in directions that may be enabled by current decisions.

### Key Questions
**Public Agencies**
1. What labor market demand data are available and usable? 
2. Can you utilize unemployment insurance claims data and jobs data to understand the ebb and flow of local labor market trends? 
3. Where are labor market information and unemployment data currently stored, and how accessible is that data? Are there data sharing agreements in place to enable access or are aggregate data and labor market information trends made publicly available? 
4. Does the information help to address specific regional needs?
5. How often are the data updated? Can you take steps to make it easier for training providers to update information about their training programs in a single location and have this data populate multiple third party applications? 
6. How do you ensure data quality? 

**Private Sector**
1. What real-time and relevant data can you contribute to the effort?
2. What unique viewpoints do you bring to the conversation?
3. How can your experience speak to strategies for ensuring that these tools present the most relevant, useful information to job seekers?

**Philanthropy**
1. How is real-time data helping to achieve the objectives of the initiative?
2. What resources can you leverage to help incorporate the most useful labor market data?
3. How have you seen skills successfully incorporated into such efforts? What connections can you help provide to other initiatives or grantees doing similar work?

### Resources and Examples
* **BrightHive tip on keeping information updated:** Colorado made it easier for training providers to update information about their training programs in a single location. They decided to consider the Eligible Training Providers List (ETPL) as the “canonical source of truth for training in Colorado.” This required that the ETPL be adjusted to accommodate information from a variety of training providers and even apprenticeships. This decision reduced the burden on data providers and continues to ensure that accurate and consistent information is available to the public. 

* [United States Chamber of Commerce Foundation’s Job Data Exchange](https://www.uschamberfoundation.org/workforce-development/JDX)
    
    An open-data tool under development, the Job Data Exchange (JDX) is the vehicle employers need to move in a scalable, sustainable way towards competency-based hiring. The JDX, and the data standard it employs, will help employers and their HR partners break down a job description into specific skill and hiring requirements. This granularity can improve signalling between employers and jobseekers about the core needs of posted positions with less reliance on proxies like years of experience, could improve filtering functionality on job boards, and enable richer labor market analysis to improve the responsiveness of all stakeholders to change.

* [Emsi COVID-19 Resources](https://www.economicmodeling.com/covid-19-resources/)
    
    Emsi provides free resources such as a job-posting-sourced skills list, personalized learning and work recommendations powered by skills data, a resume optimizer, a national and a Canadian job posting dashboard, and reports. 

* [U.S. Department of Labor, O*NET Online](https://www.onetonline.org/)
    
    The O*NET Program is the nation's primary source of occupational information. Valid data are essential to understanding the rapidly changing nature of work and how it impacts the workforce and U.S. economy. From this information, applications are developed to facilitate the development and maintenance of a skilled workforce.

* [United States Chamber of Commerce Foundation’s Talent Pipeline Management](https://www.uschamberfoundation.org/talent-pipeline-management)
    
    Talent Pipeline Management® (TPM) practices are being applied to skills gap challenges to help employers build scalable, sustainable pipelines of talent. TPM is a workforce development strategy that applies supply chain management principles to talent. TPM builds the capacity of the business community to better manage career pathways so that students and workers have better employment opportunities. 

* McKinsey: [Closing the skills gap: Creating workforce-development programs that work for everyone](https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/social-sector/our-insights/closing-the-skills-gap-creating-workforce-development-programs-that-work-for-everyone#) 
   
    Five principles for serving jobseekers: Define geographic assets and identify target professions, Deliver ROI to employers and workers, Support comprehensive, demand-driven training methods, Assess and prepare learners before they start training, Coordinate the workforce-development process centrally.
