---
play_number: 4
title: Solidify Data Use, Sharing, and Governance
---
*Job seekers need comprehensive, reliable data they can trust. Strong data-sharing agreements ensure that the information passed on to job seekers and other audiences is accurate. Moreover, these agreements can take complex data and relationships and distill them into salient, easily understandable information.*

The kinds of data needed to provide accurate, timely, and comprehensive information for the most effective job seeker tools come from a variety of sources. This includes information about available jobs, current and future economic demand, wage and earnings data, the kinds of skills necessary to fill labor market demands, training providers, and information about related support services. Members of the coalition or data collaborative are responsible for making sure that these data are connected and that a governance structure protects the data while ensuring its usefulness. Ideally, the governance body includes members from a number of stakeholder groups, including job seekers and employers.

In considering the types of data to be included in the agreements, remember to include those data that will help with continuous improvement and accountability assessment of the tool and job seeker experience. 

### Checklist
1. Create a governance structure that is sustainable and specific enough to satisfy members’ needs but flexible enough to both respond to new needs quickly and evolve over time, as opposed to fragile agreements that require lengthy legal review to update and become clunkier with revision.
2. Ensure shared ownership of the data collaborative or trust.
3. Make provisions that protect each member’s ability to control the data they contribute.
4. Identify someone who specifically represents job seekers within the data governance process, and include this job seeker or relevant representative in the conversations and decision-making around data
5. Create a diverse governance body that ensures that all stakeholders’ perspectives are heard.
6. Identify data that will help job seekers directly, as well as those data that will aid in tool design and continuous improvement for inclusion in these agreements.

### Key Questions
**Public Agencies**
1. What data can be shared or made available? 
2. What are the perceived vs. actual barriers to sharing data? 
3. What data can be provided through a vendor? 
4. How will personal data be protected?

**Private Sector**
1. How have you ensured the protection of personal data? What are your data practices and protocols for safeguarding individual-level data?
2. What is your track record on data use and privacy? How can you be transparent about data use?
3. How can you seize the opportunity to securely derive public benefit from your data? 

**Philanthropy**
1. Are there collaborations already serving the proposed population/geography?
2. If there are existing collaborations, can those be leveraged or brought into the proposed project?
3. Are the partnerships deep and sustainable?

### Resources and Examples
* **BrightHive tip on sharing available information:** Start with data that is already being shared between agencies for a specific purpose. How can this data be of additional value to job seekers? For instance, if data is already being shared between two agencies for the purposes of WIOA reporting, how can this data sharing be amended to include additional measures of ROI that would help job seekers make informed decisions about their training decisions?

* The Georgetown Beeck Center’s [Sharing Data for Social Impact: Guidebook to Establishing Responsible Governance Practices](https://beeckcenter.georgetown.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/Data-Sharing-Appendix.pdf)
    This guidebook provides information for establishing data sharing governance.

* **BrightHive tip on being a steward of public data:** Stewardship of the public’s data has historically been viewed solely through the lens of ensuring that it is not misused. States have begun including guidance that broadens this view to include a responsibility to ensure that any data being stored by the state is also creating value for public good.

* National Skills Coalition, [Making the Most of Workforce Data](https://m.nationalskillscoalition.org/resources/publications/file/WDQC-MakingtheMostofWorkforceData-webfinal.pdf)
    This webpage provides examples of state collaborations in using data.

* **BrightHive tip on how to use vendor data:** While many vendors have done the hard work of aggregating and normalizing data sets, oftentimes your agencies already have the best data to reflect the labor market trends in your region. To ensure that vendor data represents your locality, consider analyzing it against data from your system before simply pushing vendor data to job seekers. The best solutions will integrate vendor and local data through the local lens.

* Data for the American Dream, [Data Sharing Agreements](https://d4ad.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/Data-Sharing-Agreements.pdf)
    This report explores important considerations for entering and maintaining strong data sharing partnerships. 

* Data Quality Campaign, [The Art of the Possible: Data Governance Lessons Learned from Kentucky, Maryland, and Washington](https://dataqualitycampaign.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/DQC-Cross-Agency-Gov-CaseStudy-032218.pdf)
    “High-quality data governance, a body or process designed to make decisions about how state education data is linked, used, accessed, and protected, is key to establishing a culture of effective data use in states.”

* WorkForceGPS’s [All Data Big and Small: Using Information to Guide Workforce Development](https://www.youthcareerconnect.workforcegps.org/resources/2019/12/23/20/14/All-Data-Big-and-Small-Using-Information-to-Guide-Workforce-Development)  
    This report describes how investments in data are helping to improve human capital development policy and practice.
