---
play_number: 5
title: Integrate Wraparound Support Services
---
*If you build it, they may not come. Job seekers need more than a tool that gives them options for skills training and job openings; they need career navigation, advising, and wraparound support services, including more direct connections to employers.*

It is not enough to simply develop the tool and make it available. Instead, build a careful outreach plan both during development and implementation. Job seekers often have questions like: What will this skill or credential buy me in the job marketplace? What’s the deeper value of this learning to me—now and in the future? How long will this take and how much will it cost? How do others who follow this path fare, and where can I expect to land if I give this a shot? Who can help me and where can I find that help? Is this a family-sustaining job? Where can I find childcare and transportation?

### Checklist
1. Identify both digital and non-digital avenues through which job seekers may access the information in the tool and related support services. 
2. Determine effective dissemination and marketing opportunities, and consider consulting a UX designer.
3. Develop relationships with intermediaries, if they are not part of the original coalition, and equip them with guides or other collateral that help them leverage the tools with their clients. Make sure to solicit and respond to their feedback.
4. Listen to users (whether job seekers or intermediaries) on the most effective strategies for disseminating information, and which information is most useful.
5. Test the tool functionality and job seeking process with a representative sample of diverse end users, including job seekers, to get a sense of the end-to-end experience using the tool.
6. Promote equity by providing wraparound support services for vulnerable and at-risk populations, including those who do not have access to an online platform or are not able to use one.
7. Engage employers to ensure more direct connections with job seekers and remove bias from hiring practices.
8. Work with employers to ensure that hiring practices value skills and experience over degree attainment.

### Key Questions
**Public Agencies**
1. What public resources and programs can be leveraged to help job seekers?
2. What kinds of educational benefits can incentivize job seekers to pursue training opportunities while still providing for their families?
3. How can we reduce stigma associated with utilizing those supports?

**Private Sector**
1. How can machine learning and other automated strategies help to maximize the impact of the tools? How can these strategies be evaluated for discriminatory bias?
2. What can you contribute to impact strategies?
3. How can employers evaluate and build upon their role in ensuring that opportunities are equitable?

**Philanthropy**
1. What are the most effective methods for quickly reaching vulnerable populations you have seen in practice?
2. How can your resources and supports be maximized to aid in the efforts to impact the identified population?
3. How can you incentivize wrap-around support providers and workforce intermediaries to partner more directly and engage in better data sharing?

### Resources and Examples
* [Digital Services Playbook](https://playbook.cio.gov/)
    This playbook outlines best practices across sectors so that the government can build effective digital services that are responsive to the needs of the people utilizing these services.
 
* Data for the American Dream, [Communicating with Vulnerable Workers](https://d4ad.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Communication-Research-Brief.pdf)
    This report synthesizes existing research about how to communicate effectively with low-income, lower-skilled, unemployed, and underemployed workers. 

* Data for the American Dream, [Ten Strategies for Reaching Workers](https://d4ad.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/D4AD-Needs-of-Workers.pdf)
    The top 10 strategies for effective communication and impact with vulnerable workers.

* Data for the American Dream, [Addressing the Needs of Vulnerable Workers and Workforce Development Systems](https://d4ad.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/D4AD-Needs-of-Workers.pdf)
    A quick-reference with workers’ needs, traditional supports, existing barriers, and solutions.
