---
play_number: 6
title: Be Accountable
---
*Develop robust, reliable, and transparent methods for measuring and reporting the success of the movement and tools, the impact on job seekers, and project milestones. These outcome metrics must be identified and gathered from the beginning, as they will lay the foundation for proof points and policy changes for the future. The collaborative should set specific, measurable goals for the movement, rooted in job seekers’ successes.*

In order to ensure that the goals of the collaborative job seeker tools are being met, it is important to develop and monitor key metrics of success. Are workers using the resources that have been generated? Are they finding the resources useful? Are they achieving the intended outcomes? Are there mechanisms in place to collect user feedback? Creating these evaluative feedback loops will ensure that the needs of workers are central to each conversation and improve the opportunities to both identify and fulfill their data needs. These feedback loops will also help identify areas for improvement.

### Checklist
1. Identify specific metrics that are aligned with the stated goals of the project and related movement. Be sure to include both leading and lagging metrics - leading metrics can be measured early or immediately, such as usage, which contribute to the lagging metrics like hiring increases.
2. Develop a method for collecting data for these metrics.
3. Early, often, and at regular intervals, collect and analyze the performance data.
4. Make the results of the analysis transparent through public-facing dashboards and reports, when possible.
5. Based on the information gathered, create a plan for improvements.
6. Work with policymakers and other decision-makers to create a plan of action based on findings.
7. Use accountability processes to ensure equity.

### Key Questions
**Public Agencies**
1. What are the overall goals of the movement? 
2. How will the tools measurable improve the lives of job seekers and employers?
3. How can we communicate about successful and weak points – including how we will improve those – in the future?

**Private Sector**
1. How can your services contribute to data collection and analysis?
2. What is your role in helping to disseminate the results and provide recommendations to stakeholders?
3. For third party application developers, how can platform usage data be made available to the public as an additional data resource? 

**Philanthropy**
1. What are the important lessons to be learned from previous work?
2. What are the metrics that show that the project has been successful?
3. What is a reasonable timeframe to demonstrate project success?

### Resources and Examples
* **BrightHive tip on third party app developers:** If data can reveal gaps in the training programs or skills available that individuals in a specific geography are searching for but not finding, this information could be used by training providers to modify their offerings. 

* The Urban Institute, [Changing Workforce Systems](https://www.urban.org/sites/default/files/publication/88301/changing_workforce_systems2.pdf)
    An example for how to describe and measure systems change.

