---
play_number: 7
title: Create a Movement
---
*Job seeker tools that are part of a larger movement are more likely to have an impact. Job seekers, employers, and other stakeholders will coalesce around a call to action, or a campaign to improve economic outcomes for a given population. To build a stronger foundation for a better functioning ecosystem, job seekers will need information, resources, and services to come together in a seamless and more easily navigable way that they can trust.*

Campaigns with intentional goals, a call to action, and a specific plan for achieving the goals can drive support and stakeholder buy-in. Tools that are anchored in a larger movement will ultimately better serve the job seekers, intermediaries trying to help job seekers, and localities and states. Creating a movement brings a larger sense of purpose and meaning. A movement will also provide a broader foundation for sustainability.

### Checklist
1. Evaluate the needs of job seekers, the state (or other geographical area), and employers.
2. Identify gaps in what is available, and to whom, and what needs resonate loudly with communities.
3. Recruit stakeholders who have an interest in job seekers to participate in the coalition.
4. Set attainable and measurable goals.
5. Develop a communications and outreach plan.
6. Incorporate various viewpoints.

### Key Questions
**Public Agencies**
- What is the specific need? Who is the intended audience?
- What kinds of public agencies and private vendors can best guide the development of a tool? 

**Private Sector**
- What exists in the ecosystem?
- How might the vendor’s specific skill set add to the conversation and resources available?
- What are the appropriate public sector agencies to engage?

**Philanthropy**
- What is the need?
- What is already being done in the state/region?
- How can efforts be additive, rather than duplicative?
- How will additional funding enhance existing work?

### Resources and Examples
- **BrightHive tip on collaborative tool development:** Each participating stakeholder may have a slightly different reason or subpopulation they are most interested in. Utilize the different priorities to ensure that various user personas are considered in the design and implementation of data and tools. Stakeholders can serve as subject matter experts and content creators for their specific users. 
- [Return Stronger Arizona](https://www.azcommerce.com/returnstronger/): This solution connects job seekers with local career counselors who will provide guidance and recommendations on programs and services aligned with their specific employment goals.
