---
play_number: 1
play_type: FOUNDATIONAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL
title: Follow the lead of public health experts and use evidence-based solutions
---

It is essential that members of a DCTT initiative coalition work with medical and public health partners to understand their data needs. Decisions about which data, analytic, and technological models to pursue should be based on medical and public health partners’ needs, their estimates of efficacy, and should be grounded in the best available evidence.

### Checklist
1. Ensure DCTT uses and limitations have been taken into account, documented, and mitigated where appropriate, before implementation.
2. Continuously monitor the state of DCTT performance across various contexts, including monitoring for new research or evidence, alternative technologies, or unintended consequences (such as negative impacts on public health goals or unfair advantages or disadvantages for certain communities).
3. Commit to limiting the scope of the DCTT initiative according to the advice of public health experts, including policies for dissolution of activities that:
    - Prove to be poorly validated or ineffective by epidemiologist or expert assessment for controlling the pandemic or infection chains, or
    - Exceed the scope of its intended public health purpose to reduce the transmission of COVID-19.

### Key Questions
- Has the DCTT implementation been assessed by epidemiological experts? Has it been assessed against generally acceptable contact tracing privacy standards and principles? 
- How have limitations to DCTT been identified and addressed (including limitations related to accuracy, relevance, power, and interoperability with epidemiological models)?
- How will the DCTT system’s performance be monitored and evaluated?
- What is the process to modify or terminate DCTT activities if they are found to be ineffective or at risk of exceeding their original scope?
