---
play_number: 2
play_type: FOUNDATIONAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL
title: Decision-makers should be guided by necessity, proportionality, and purpose limitations
---

Measures taken in response to pandemics should be necessary and proportionate, to ensure that responses will be beneficial to solving the crisis without undue infringement on individual privacy and civil rights. Any personal information collected and used to control the harmful effects and spread of a pandemic should be strictly time-limited and confined to a specific, well-defined public health purpose. Historical evidence suggests that it is difficult to discontinue practices initiated during an emergency, and that proactive measures are required to avoid “mission creep.” Coalitions seeking to use personal information to control the harmful effects and spread of a pandemic should ask themselves whether or not a specific measure constitutes a necessary, appropriate, and proportionate action within a democratic society.

### Checklist
1. Establish an exit strategy up front to protect against continued “emergency practices” after the end of the public health crisis.
2. Proactively identify and mitigate risks of mission creep and new or unanticipated uses of personal information.
3. Deploy DCTT in the least intrusive way and handle personal information at the lowest level of identifiability and scale necessary to accomplish stated public health goals.
4. Clearly articulate the specific risks and benefits to individuals and the public that are created by the DCTT.
5. Collect only the personal information strictly necessary to accomplish stated public health goals and nothing more.

### Key Questions
- Which medical and public health experts were consulted to determine the types of personal information necessary to accomplish specific public health goals?
- How were the anticipated impacts of the DCTT identified and weighed to ensure that potential risks to individuals and society are proportionate to the potential benefits? 
- Are there components of the DCTT service for which aggregate information or summary statistics, rather than individual or identifiable information, are sufficient? 
- If there are multiple options for implementing certain DCTT components or functionalities, which is the most privacy-preserving that still accomplishes stated public health goals?
- If personal data is shared with partners or service providers, are there equally strict limitations on its duration and use by other entities?
- Who will proactively audit DCTT data systems to ensure that data is not used beyond the original purposes and stated public health goals for which it was collected? 
- How will personal information and DCTT services be safely and securely shut down when no longer needed, or when the public health emergency has ended? 
