---
play_number: 3
title: Work with established partners who have demonstrated experience with responsible data sharing
---

Trusted partners with the organizational and technical capacity to support DCTTs are essential. Some organizations, such as those with established ‘Data for Good’ programs, may already have experience sharing data in privacy-protecting ways with university, NGO, or government partners, including public health authorities. In addition, university-based programs and services, including research centers with experience in data ethics, might streamline the establishment of trusted data sharing arrangements between public agencies, companies developing and/or providing DCTT, and other institutions that will need to share data with one another to coordinate contact tracing.

### Checklist
1. Carefully select partners and service providers based on their experience safeguarding personal health information and established reputation in the health sector.
2. Have all partners and service providers commit to accountability and transparency, and provide timely communication to communities and stakeholders.
3. Agree to terms and data uses with partners and service providers in advance, before any personal data is collected. 
4. Develop guidelines to define roles and responsibilities for partners and service providers in the DCTT initiative, as applicable. 


### Key Questions
- Do all parties that will handle DCTT data have a demonstrated history of safeguarding sensitive health information? How is it demonstrated?
- Do all project partners have evidence of a commitment to protecting individual privacy?
- Are there clear contractual agreements in place describing the roles and responsibilities of each partner, particularly with regards to their handling and use of personal data? 
- What is the process, and who is responsible, for conducting due diligence on all partners and service providers?
- What is the process to vet and audit service providers’ privacy and security practices, and who is responsible for overseeing the process? 
