---
play_number: 4
play_type: FOUNDATIONAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL
title: Develop a data governance structure
---

At the outset of a DCT development project, establish a governance committee including partners, experts, data users, and DCTT users who will guide development of processes and procedures for collection, use, and destruction of data. This group should include a diverse array of individuals representing state and local public health agencies, privacy advocates, organizations that have the legitimacy to represent the individuals who are being asked to share their contact data, and other types of community advocacy organizations that want to support public health efforts while being responsive to ethical concerns. Do not wait until the technology solution is determined or implemented to establish and convene this committee.

### Checklist
1. Create a steering committee that represents the array of data stakeholders in the DCTT initiative, including those that provide and use contact tracing data. 
2. Establish a charter or similar covenant that clearly defines roles and responsibilities, and enumerates the privacy and ethical principles that guide the committee’s work and decisions about data use. 
3. Define the boundaries of the digital contact tracing initiative to prevent mission creep and deter potential secondary uses of personal data that are tangential to the immediate goals and/or use cases that do not align with the values and ethical principles articulated by the steering committee.
4. Use the committee to inform the development of consent and data sharing protocols and processes.

### Key Questions
- Does the committee agree on a clearly defined goal for the use of DCTT and a definition of success? If not, is there a process for issue escalation? Who would have final decision-making authority in cases when the committee disagrees?
- Are the ways that data may be collected and will be shared clear to every individual and organization on the committee?
- Does the group represent people whose data is being collected and used and whose privacy at risk? 
- Is each individual and organization on the committee committed to upholding the privacy and ethical principles it has articulated as core to contact tracing data sharing? 
