---
play_number: 5
title: Go the extra mile to seek public trust
---

While transparency on its own is insufficient to protect individual privacy, respect for individual autonomy requires that the public understand how personal data is used and protected from misuse during a health crisis. Certain public health measures, including DCTT, rely on individuals’ willingness to provide their information in service of a larger goal. In support of such measures, governments, public health authorities, and corporate leaders seeking to share data should take extra steps to engage the public and be transparent about how personal data is used, by whom, and for what specific purposes.

### Checklist
1. Give the public complete and easy-to-understand descriptions of how personal information is handled and safeguarded.
2. Clearly and publicly identify any government authorities, companies, institutions, or other entities that handle personal information collected as part of a DCTT initiative. Make available, upon reasonable request, the roles or officials involved in the initiative.
3. Provide a clear legal basis for the collection of personal information as appropriate.
4. Describe how the use of personal information will be limited, including prohibited uses and users. 
5. Regularly update the public about how effective the DCTT initiative is, the extent to which public health goals are achieved, and highlight any unintended consequences observed. 
6. Require valid legal process, such as a court order, for law enforcement or other government officials access to centralized DCTT user data, and publish regular transparency reports documenting such requests.

### Key Questions
- Outside of a legal privacy notice, how does the initiative intend to communicate in plain language with individual users and the public about its performance and important privacy updates? 
- Does the DCTT initiative’s privacy notice meet legal and industry best practices? 
- Is there a specific legal basis for the initiative’s collection and processing of personal information for public health purposes? If so, is it time-limited, such as for the duration of a declared public health emergency?
- How will all partners and service providers that will handle personal data as part of the initiative be identified to the public, and how will this information be kept up to date? 
- Are key technical components and essential data-handling principles or guidelines for the initiative available for independent or public review? 
- Are transparency reports about law enforcement or other government requests for access to DCTT data clear, accessible, and timely? 
- Based on the DCTT design, what legal process is considered by courts sufficient for law enforcement to gain access to the data? Is a subpoena or lower standard sufficient, or is a warrant required?
