---
play_number: 6
title: Respect context
---

Meaningful and inclusive public engagement is essential to building health tools and analytics that reflect generally-held collective values, including privacy, equity, efficiency, community health, and more. If deployed un-critically, digital health technologies risk exacerbating existing societal inequalities, including racial, socioeconomic, and digital divides. Coalitions that seek to deploy a DCTT iniatitive should recognize and address such concerns, and ensure that these technologies do not subject communities to additional discrimination or unfairness.

### Checklist
1. Create opportunities for inclusive and meaningful public engagement at every stage in the project development lifecycle, and use what is learned during those engagements to design and implement initiatives that align with and reflect the community’s values. 
2. Identify and address barriers that vulnerable or minority communities face in accessing digital tools and resources, including limited access to health care or digital services, and work to rectify them.
3. Deploy DCTT as part of a broader strategy that ensures individuals without access to digital technologies or services are not left behind, and that does not reinforce existing biases or unfair disadvantages across communities.
4. Recognize and account for the diversity of values held by individual members of society, as well as differing risk tolerances and privacy preferences.

### Key Questions
- Has the initiative regularly and meaningfully engaged community stakeholders to understand their feedback, opinions, and concerns? What do community stakeholders say about about whether or how DCTT might subject them or others to possible discrimination or disadvantage? 
- Are the initiative’s public engagements building relationships and trust with community stakeholders?
- What steps are being taken to ensure that the technology design reflects an appropriate balance and prioritization of the identified community values?
- What steps are being taken to understand--and prevent--DCTT from being used in ways that are potentially overreaching or harmful, such as contributing to public or private surveillance for non-public health purposes?
- What strategies have been identified to leverage the DCTT initiative in ways that intentionally address or rectify existing inequities?
