---
play_number: 7
play_type: Foundational and Organizational
title: Individual data sharing must be voluntary
---

Governments should not require individuals to share personal health information or mandate the use of digital contact training technologies. Any incentives provided to encourage the adoption of such technologies must not be coercive, but rather support their equitable and voluntary use.

### Checklist
1. Get affirmative, informed consent from individuals before collecting any personal information and before making any material changes to how personal information is handled.
2. Develop a consent flow that is appropriate to the situation and individual. 
3. Provide individuals or their legally authorized representatives with a way to withdraw their consent.
4. Do not provide incentives that are coercive or would encourage inequitable outcomes.
5. Do not bundle consent to DCTT with other functionalities. 

### Key Questions
- Are individuals provided with easy-to-understand information about how their data will be collected, used, shared, stored, and safeguarded before being asked to consent to the collection of their personal information?
- Is the consent provided freely given, specific, informed, and unambiguous?
- Is it as easy for individuals to withdraw consent as it was to provide it?
- Could any incentives provided to encourage DCTT services be considered coercive, inequitable, exploitive, or not aligned with effective use of the technology? 
- How is your consent flow consistent with the context and organizational best practices? (E.g., standards for informed consent from public health authorities, from humanitarian experts, privacy regulators, or from human-centered design experts).
- Are there features for individuals to provide more (or less) personal information if it is their preference?
- What is the process for asking individuals to re-consent to sharing their data for purposes outside the original scope of limiting the spread of COVID-19? 
