---
play_number: 8
play_type: FOUNDATIONAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL
title: Design accessible features
---

In a public health crisis, the reliability and representativeness of DCTT information is vitally important. However, digital technologies and services are not always designed in ways that are accessible to individuals with disabilities and may fail to adequately record their experiences. The consequences of this sort of biased or inaccurate data can be lasting, leading to poor or inefficient decision-making, unethical or illegal data uses, or discriminatory outcomes. DCTT initiatives and features should be designed in ways that are accessible to all.

### Checklist
1. Design all DCTT initiative services to be fully accessible and based on the latest [World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) Web Accessibility Initiative](https://www.w3.org/WAI/standards-guidelines/) (WAI) standards.
2. Support interoperability with the widest array of accessibility functions on major mobile devices possible.
3. Explicitly recognize and rectify any remaining accessibility gaps that may limit persons with disabilities from participating in the DCTT initiative, to the extent possible.


### Key Questions
- Have people with disabilities or legitimate representatives of their community been consulted for advice on design of DCTT features?
- Have benchmarks and standards for accessibility been consulted throughout the design process?
- Has the DCTT initiative designed a service that accounts for changes in individuals’ abilities related to their potential illness trajectory?
