---
play_number: 9
play_type: FOUNDATIONAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL
title: Hold decision-makers accountable
---

In order to maintain public trust and legitimacy, oversight and accountability mechanisms must be clear and functional at every stage in the process. Systems used to support a DCTT initiative must be continuously maintained and monitored to ensure that they are effective, that they are not causing harm, and that they are not imposing disparate impacts across communities. It is also essential that data protections be enforced, and that organizations create mechanisms for individuals and experts to raise concerns and ask questions.

### Checklist
1. Put public authorities in the driver’s seat, and ensure that leadership of the DCTT initiative includes public officials who are accountable to the public through appropriate electoral or appointment mechanisms.
2. Provide individuals and diverse communities with meaningful opportunities to contribute to the design and oversight of the DCTT initiative.
3. Designate a senior leader to be responsible for day-to-day privacy and data protection activities. 
4. Conduct regular reviews and audits of data-handling procedures to ensure that personal information is being used and safeguarded as promised.
5. Establish mechanisms to escalate serious privacy or security concerns to initiative leaders, such as the steering committee.
6. Create a mechanism for external researchers and experts to report privacy or security vulnerabilities.
7. Create accessible public platforms for individuals to ask general and technical questions, file complaints, learn more, and contribute to the DCTT initiative. 


### Key Questions
-	Which public authorities or officials are overseeing the DCTT initiative’s efforts? Have such authorities provided any specific guidance or resources for safeguarding DCTT data?
- Are there independent auditors or experts who can assess the initiative’s compliance with data protection and data security best practices?
- How will the DCTT initiative measure the success of its oversight and accountability mechanisms?
- Will the initiative provide a monitored, open, accessible channel to the public (such as conversational wizards or 211/ 311/811 community lines)?

