---
play_number: 10
play_type: Technical and Operational
title: Keep systems secure
---

Centralized repositories of data can elevate privacy and security risks and attract unauthorized attempts to access or use personal information. DCTT initiatives must keep data secure against both internal and external threats. Robust technical controls such as encryption and access limitations, along with regular security audits and vulnerability tests, are essential safeguards.

### Checklist
1. Develop and document a comprehensive data security program that ensures DCTT data is protected from unauthorized access or use at every point in its lifecycle, from collection to destruction or storage, including backups. 
2. Proactively monitor and test the DCTT initiative’s systems for security vulnerabilities.
3. Limit access to personal information through technical, legal, and organizational controls.
4. Monitor and log all access to and handling of personal information, including by partners and service providers.
5. Create common security protocols for each unit when federated data architectures are used. 
6. Encrypt personal data in transit and at rest, to the extent possible, using proven cryptographic techniques.

### Key Questions
- Are strong and legally compliant computer-based security systems being used to protect against internal and external security breaches or unauthorized access and use of personal data? 
- In the event that there is a security incident or breach, who is responsible for rectifying the situation and notifying impacted individuals?
- Is access to users’ personal data limited to only the minimum necessary initiative employees to protect against internal threats or misuses of data?
- Are personal data securely stored on individual and organizational devices and not publicly available?
