---
play_number: 11
title: Support dynamic and interoperable systems
---

Because public health emergencies involving communicable diseases are quickly evolving, coalitions supporting DCTT initiatives must ensure that the data produced is equally dynamic. Initiatives and the data and systems they rely on must be able to adapt to changing medical, legal, social, and technical factors. Data collected in response to a crisis such as a pandemic disease is typically needed by multiple types of organizations in numerous jurisdictions, and interoperability between digital systems is essential to ensuring collected information is able to serve its intended purpose.

### Checklist
1. Communicate with partners and service providers to design DCTT systems’ data structures for the greatest extent of interoperability possible.
2. Continuously monitor and evaluate whether the DCTT’s technical design is appropriate and responsive to the current public health situation.
3. Embed privacy by design principles across the lifecycle of DCTT.
4. Follow or establish common standards for data protection, preservation, and quality among the initiative’s partners and service providers.
5. Agree on a common protocol and compatible data structures to ensure minimum necessary exchange and processing of data.

### Key Questions
- Which organizations are a priority for the initiative to coordinate with, in order to minimize duplication of efforts and data collection?
- How will the initiative ensure that it can support a dynamic DCTT design that is responsive to evolving public health needs without leading to increased or unanticipated data collection, secondary uses, or mission creep? 
- Have data interoperability structures, such as common ontologies, meta-data descriptions, and data dictionaries been consulted? Have these interoperability structures been checked for conformity to expert standards in the medical or public health profession?
- How does the DCTT initiative support the tracing of contacts across physical and jurisdictional borders, in both a technical and organizational manner? 
