---
play_number: 13
title: Support individual controls and choices
---

Individuals who choose to adopt digital contact tracing technologies should have their privacy and data protected by design and by default. To the extent possible, individuals should be able to make meaningful choices about how, with whom, and for what purposes their personal information is shared, as well as an ability to change their mind. Users should be able to view, correct, or request the deletion of their personal data, to the extent possible. 

### Checklist
1. Let individuals see and access the personal data that the DCTT initiative, including partners and service providers, holds about them.
2. Give individuals a way to make corrections to the personal data that the DCTT initiative holds about them. 
3. Allow individuals to delete or request the deletion of their personal data, to the extent possible. 
4. Provide individuals with portable, machine-readable copies of their personal information that the individual can transfer to another service if they desire. 
5. Allow individuals to request human review of any automated decision-making that would have a legal or similarly significant effect. 


### Key Questions
- How does the DCTT initiative allow individuals to access, correct, delete, or port their personal information? Are such capabilities provided at no charge and in a timely manner?
- What transparency and review mechanisms are in place for situations where the initiative is not able to reasonably provide individuals with mechanisms to access, correct, delete, or port their personal information?
- Will the DCTT initiative incorporate automated decision-making processes that could have legal or similarly significant effects for individuals? If so, who will be responsible for reviewing those decisions on behalf of impacted individuals? 
