---
play_number: 14
title: Apply privacy enhancing technologies (PETs)
---

Public health initiatives collecting and handling personal information should adopt advanced privacy-preserving and privacy-enhancing technologies from the outset. Sophisticated approaches such as differential privacy or secure multiparty computation should be considered where practical, and technical measures should be complemented with organizational and legal controls. DCTT initiatives should incorporate the most robust privacy-enhancing technologies appropriate given analytic and public health needs, and the techniques and methodologies applied should be published publicly to enable independent review.

### Checklist
1. Incorporate privacy and data protection checks at each stage of the software development lifecycle.
2. Test systems before deployment with and without incorporation of privacy enhancing technologies to identify areas of greater data leak or data exposure.
3. Interface often with security and design teams to ensure software architecture choices do not inadvertently undermine incorporation of privacy enhancing technologies. 
4. Publish your technical documentation and methodology so that it is available for public review. 

### Key Questions
- Have technical and design teams been actively encouraged to incorporate privacy enhancing technologies throughout the design process?
- Which data minimization practices have been considered and applied?
- Will data be released publicly (where it can be subjected to a wide array of potential re-identification attacks) or used and shared only subject to legal and organizational controls?
- How will the initiative determine the appropriate level of aggregation or perturbation of the personal information that it handles to preserve privacy and maintain data utility? 
- Are formal or cryptographically guaranteed privacy enhancing technologies appropriate for any of the initiative’s use cases?
- Are there independent auditors or experts who can assess the initiative’s application of privacy-enhancing technologies?
