---
play_number: 15
play_type: Technical and Operational
title: Prepare DCTT users for possible uses of data in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML)
---

Machine learning-based technologies can play a substantial role in this pandemic and future public health response measures. Experts can use machine learning to study the virus, test potential treatments, diagnose individuals, analyze the public health impacts, and more. Digital contact tracing data will provide valuable information from which such systems can draw insights into individual and group behavior. When coalitions support DCTT initiatives that expect data will be used in AI or ML research or development, additional data protection precautions must be taken.

### Checklist
1. Monitor DCTT systems that use ML (e.g., to optimize individuals’ experiences or improve functionality of exposure notifications) for performance and model drift. 
2. Utilize privacy-preserving ML techniques, such as federated ML, and monitor them on an ongoing basis to ensure that privacy is maintained. 
3. Conduct extensive audits of ML systems during development, testing, and deployment.
4. Design stakeholder values into ML systems, where technically feasible. 
5. Conduct differential impact assessments on ‘intermediate models’ of DCTT systems using ML, in order to test whether they create discriminatory impacts.


### Key Questions
- Will DCTT data in this initiative be used for training, testing, or validating AI/ ML systems? What about by partners or service providers? 
- Are third party software development kits (SDKs) that include uses of AI or ML incorporated into the DCTT? Do those SDKs have access to all of the data within the DCTT?
- Have potential AI/ML uses of DCTT data been tested against privacy-preserved data sets, such as simulated data or digital twins? 
- Have any differential impacts, unacceptable data leaks, or related privacy concerns identified a consequence of those tests been mitigated or addressed?
