---
play_number: 16
play_type: Technical and Operational
title: Delete or de-identify after the public health emergency
---

DCTT data processed in response to the crisis should be kept only for the duration of the public health emergency. Once appropriate authorities have determined that the crisis has ended, personal information should be promptly deleted or permanently de-identified. In certain cases, it may be appropriate for non-identifiable information to be kept for limited, public-interest historical and research purposes, subject to appropriate ethical safeguards and controls. 

### Checklist
1. Promptly de-identify any remaining personal information after the public health emergency, using robust technical, organizational, and legal safeguards appropriate to the circumstances *(see Play 14: Privacy Enhancing Technologies)*.
2. Promptly and securely dispose of any remaining personal information after the public health emergency, both physically and electronically. 
3. Communicate with the scientific community early in the initiative’s development process to determine which forms of data should be considered an important part of future scientific research.
4. Give individuals opportunities to opt-in to public-interest historical and research use of their personal information, where appropriate.


### Key Questions
- How much time after the official end of the public health emergency will the initiative require to securely delete or de-identify all remaining personal information? 
- Have public health researchers been consulted for their data needs when developing processes and procedures for data preservation, aggregation or de-identification, and deletion?
- Are there mechanisms in place to evaluate the integrity, ethics, and lawfulness of any proposed secondary uses of de-identified DCTT data? *(See Play 17: Ethical Review)*
- If de-identified data is maintained for limited, public-interest historical and research purposes, what policies and procedures are in place to prevent or significantly reduce the probability of re-identification or incompatible secondary use? 
- Are there independent auditors or experts who can validate that the initiative has securely deleted or de-identified all remaining personal information and does not retain any identifiable DCTT data after the end of the public health emergency?
