---
play_number: 17
play_type: TECHNICAL AND OPERATIONAL
title: Seek independent ethical review
---

Given both the significant benefits to society and the significant privacy risks to individuals of DCTT, it is essential that DCTT initiatives are held to the highest standards of ethical governance and digital design. Ethical reviews are also important for determining which secondary uses of DCTT data, such as public interest or historical research, are appropriate. Such review processes could consist of several components, such as review by an internal committee, an external committee, or a body of collaborative stakeholders. Ethical standards appropriate to DCTT initiatives should be defined by the groups producing or impacted by the technology.

### Checklist
1. Establish an ethical review process to assess the privacy risks arising from collecting, sharing, combining, using, and/or preserving DCTT data.
2. Require ethical review and ongoing oversight for any new or materially changed data collection practices, features, and uses.
3. Publish the ethical standards or frameworks that will guide ethical reviews for the initiative.
4. Gather experts and form an independent body or board that is not involved in the design or conduct of the DCTT initiative and that receives no monetary contribution for any intended collection or uses of the data. 
5. Document the decisions and rationale of each ethical review conducted. 

### Key Questions
- What standards or frameworks will guide the ethical review process for this initiative?
- Do any of the partners to this initiative engage in ethical reviews on a regular basis, such as through an institutional review board? 
- What level of independence will this initiative’s ethical review process require, in order to maintain public trust?
- How diverse is the composition of the ethical review body? Does it include representatives from groups impacted by the technology?
